[Claire] Previously...
I cannot admit there is anything to do
but go on.
[Jamie] That will be where
the new house will stand.
We will make it back here one day.
won't we?
Aye.
We will.
Allow me to introduce
William Buccleigh MacKenzie.
Your servant. madam.
'Twas at Craigh na Dun.
And here I am.
Rob Cameron.
He did it. Rob took Jem.
- [Fiona] Bree!
- [Brianna] It's Rob!
Callahan!
Brianna!
[Brianna] So where do we belong now?
So it's not a question
of where we belong. it's when.
[William Grey]
Your son is due home shortly.
Son?
What we really want
is your protection.
Where's Jane?
Major Jenkins. Said that
she killed Captain Harkness
and dragged her away.
[Jamie] We need to go.
You can come and live with us
on the Ridge. You'll be safe.
Who was thy wife?
Her name is Wahionhaweh.
Emily chose me.
But. Rachel. with my whole soul.
I choose you.
A place where we could raise our family.
You mean...
I have had carnal knowledge of your wife.
Henry and Ben
will be fighting across the sea.
Do you want to have to tell your wife
that your sons have died in a war
that could have been stopped?
I will do my best by thee.
Can we go home?
You're not going back to the army?
No.
I came to ask...
forgiveness.
♪ Beside the seaside ♪
♪ Oh. I do like to be ♪
♪ Beside the sea ♪
[Frances] ♪ So just let me be ♪
♪ Beside the seaside ♪
How could you possibly know that song?
My mother taught it to me.
I think Faith lived.
I think our daughter lived.
Where the bloody hell is he?
He'll come.
No smuggler worth his salt
would miss the chance
to sell 30 barrels of good whiskey.
Well. I just hope he doesn't get
close enough to smell the herring.
I willna allow it.
Much as I love the sound
of your voice. Sassenach.
try not to speak unless spoken to.
[knocking at door]
[tense music playing]
You have exquisite taste. Mr. Roy.
[scoffs]
You'll not have trouble
finding buyers in the north.
Armies there will be thirsty.
You'll easily double your investment.
[Vasquez] Who gave you my name?
Mrs. Abbott. In Philadelphia.
Do you often
take business advice from whores?
[Jamie] Mrs. Abbott tells me
you're a man to be trusted.
Recalls you didn't have
the money to pay your debts.
Aye. it took you a wee while.
but you returned with
something much better than coin.
Two lassies. to settle your score.
[in Spanish] Yes. That's how it is.
[in English] Whiskey wasn't the only
reason I wanted to meet. Mr. Vasquez.
I wish to expand my business.
Tell me. where do you find the girls?
It so happens I found them at sea.
My men and I were looking
for a ship heavy with goods.
But the captain. Pocock was his name.
was foolish enough to bring his family.
A wife...
and two daughters.
With my knife as encouragement.
he was willing to part with the cargo.
but not so willing to part with the girls.
So I was forced to slit his throat.
One of the daughters
was still too young to earn.
Even the smallest man
would tear her to pieces.
But with that face and those golden curls.
I knew she would soon command
a premium. an assurance for the future.
But her sister was ripe and ready.
I don't think she had ever seen
a cock before I stuck her with mine.
That one will have paid my debts
100 times over by now.
- But the captain's wife. ooh...
- [voice echoing]
...she would have brought
a pretty penny herself.
- Beautiful. wild hair. skin like velvet.
- [voice continues echoing]
It's a shame I never had
a chance to fuck her.
She turned into a rabid dog
when I touched her daughter.
scratching. biting. screaming.
Too much trouble.
I threw her overboard.
Only death would shut her up.
[laughter]
[groans loudly]
[squelching]
[both grunting]
[body thuds]
[groans]
[grunts. splashes]
[panting]
We need to leave. Sassenach.
I killed him too quickly.
Should have let that bastard suffer.
Should have made him feel
every ounce of agony the body can feel.
and even then... Even then.
it wouldn't be punishment enough.
Aye. Well. the devil will
give him his proper due
for what he did to Jane and Frances.
- And Faith.
- She was alive.
We could have had a life with her.
and he robbed us of that chance.
He wasn't the only one.
You told me you held our babe
in your hands all those years ago.
That she was stillborn.
already lost to us.
So how did she come to be married
to a sea captain
- with two daughters of her own?
- I don't know.
I don't know.
Mother Hildegarde.
she must have done something. or...
Master Raymond.
He asked for my forgiveness. But for what?
Somebody lied.
But why?
Why would they steal our child from us?
I always imagined our daughter in heaven.
I mourned an innocent soul
who hadna had a chance at life.
And to find out she lived.
but that her life was cut short...
[in Gaelic] My God.
[in English] She was out there. Jamie.
What did her laugh sound like?
Or did she...
Did she smile in her sleep.
like you and Bree?
Who held her when she cried?
Oh. God...
[crying]
What if nobody did?
What if she went through her whole life
thinking that nobody wanted her when...
when all we wanted.
more than anything in the world. was her?
- [melancholy music playing]
- [continues crying]
You lost your parents at a young age.
mo nighean donn.
Wandered the world. rootless.
But then. we found each other.
I am the true home of your heart.
Maybe it was the same for our daughter.
Maybe she wandered. too.
then found her home.
made a family.
She was loved. Claire.
I have to believe that.
[crying]
[woman] ♪ Sing me a song ♪
♪ Of a lass that is gone ♪
♪ Say. could that lass ♪
♪ Be I? ♪
♪ Merry of soul ♪
♪ She sailed on a day ♪
♪ Over the sea ♪
♪ To Skye ♪
♪ Billow and breeze ♪
♪ Islands and seas ♪
♪ Mountains of rain and sun ♪
♪ All that was good ♪
♪ All that was fair ♪
♪ All that was me ♪
♪ Is gone ♪
♪ Sing me a song ♪
♪ Of a lass that is gone ♪
♪ Say. could that lass ♪
♪ Be I? ♪
♪ Merry of soul ♪
♪ She sailed on a day ♪
♪ Over the sea ♪
♪ To Skye ♪
[sighs]
[Claire] Have you managed to sleep at all?
No.
No. I was thinking about our Faith.
And all that we still did not ken.
- I wish Fanny remembered more.
- Aye.
She couldna have been
more than five years old
when she was sold to the brothel.
We shouldn't press her.
She's already suffered
more than any child should.
First. her parents.
Jane...
Do you think we should tell her?
That she's our granddaughter?
How can we explain it to her
when we don't know
how it's possible ourselves?
She might not believe us.
And then. we'll have broken
whatever trust she started having in us.
It's no small miracle that a...
piece of Faith came to be in our lives.
Her daughter.
Despite all we've lost.
we can thank the Lord for that blessing.
[footsteps approaching]
[both sighing]
- [faint giggling]
- [Jamie sighs]
[children giggling]
- [gasps]
- [Jamie] Ah!
- Good morning. Grand-père. Grand-mère.
- Come down for breakfast.
[Marsali] Did I. or did I not
tell you wee heathens
to let your grandparents sleep?
Now. get away from there before... Oh!
Yes. good morning to you both.
There's some coffee
and a wee bit of porridge
downstairs when you're ready.
Sounds wonderful.
Thank you. Marsali.
Aye. and since you're up.
I wouldn't mind a hand with the press.
We'll be down shortly. mon fils.
I'm eager to see this workshop of yours.
- [groans softly]
- Mmm.
We were so newly arrived
when the British took over the city.
We had not yet begun
printing the newspaper.
Now. I'm careful to be
perfectly impartial in its pages.
if not a bit more complimentary
to the British Army than they deserve.
A wise choice.
Ah! [chuckles softly]
They may question
the loyalty of a Frenchman.
Indeed. It also helps that
it was a regiment of Highlanders
who captured Savannah for the British.
And I happen to have a Scottish wife.
and the name. Fraser. above the door.
For that. I'm forgiven
a multitude of sins.
[Jamie] Ah...
[knocking]
[hollow knocking]
But the British dinna forgive sedition...
Well. I better not get caught. then.
Don't worry.
I'm doing everything you taught me.
- Difference is. you have a family now.
- Oui.
You had a family then.
They were safe in the Highlands.
not with me in Edinburgh.
There wasn't a war then.
Which is why this work is even more vital
than what we did before.
- Which is why it's also more dangerous.
- In these times.
there's little one can do
that isn't dangerous.
If I'm going to be killed for something.
I should like it to be
something that matters.
[speaking French] The pen is my sword.
[scoffs softly]
[in English] Just promise me
you'll be careful.
[speaking French] Always.
[indistinct chatter and laughter]
[in English] Why didn't Uncle Ian
come with you. Grand-père?
He very much wanted
to see you. a bhalaich.
but your new Auntie Rachel is with child.
so he was eager
to get her settled back on the Ridge.
I canna fault him for that.
given the luck he's had with bairns.
Cookies for breakfast.
[all] Hey!
- What are grannies for?
- Yep. No.
[Claire] Now. there you go.
Oh. [groans playfully]
- Three dozen all for me.
- Hey!
How do you do that?
It's not difficult. Sassenach.
It's easier than counting goats and sheep.
After all. cookies dinna have legs.
- Legs?
- Aye.
To know how many goats you have.
you must count all the legs
and divide by four.
Maybe Fanny would be so kind
as to help you all
count out the morning deliveries
- before the news goes stale?
- Come on. lad.
Thanks. Granny.
[kisses] You're welcome.
[Jamie] Well. help yourself.
- Henri-Christian seems to be thriving.
- Aye.
He's our joy. our wee lad.
Fanny's a sweet lass.
And bright. too.
She seems remarkably unspoiled
for one who grew up in a brothel.
Aye. her sister protected her innocence
and virtue. so far as she could.
Still. it cannot be easy for her.
A brothel is
not an ideal place for a child.
but it is home.
if that's the only home she's known.
To lose that and her sister as well...
That's why we canna stay much longer.
Made a promise to Frances. And to Claire.
'Tis time to go home.
We will miss you all terribly.
I'll miss you. too.
But it won't be goodbye. only au revoir.
[kisses]
[sweeping music playing]
[Frances] Are we nearly there?
When will we get to Fraser's Ridge?
[Jamie] We've been on the Ridge
for the past two days.
- You mean all of this is yours?
- [Jamie] Aye. leannain.
'Tis ours. Far as your eyes can see.
[Claire] This is our home.
Your home.
[baby crying]
[William Grey]
You woke the baby. Damn you.
[Graves] This man was taken into
our custody during an altercation
with a band of Rebels outside of town.
He claims to be
the ninth Earl of Ellesmere
and a former soldier
in His Majesty's Army.
Captain. I was a captain
in His Majesty's Army
before I resigned my commission.
We believe him to be a spy.
He assured us you could
offer some clarity on the matter.
Yes. I understand the confusion.
given as His Lordship currently appears
more like a highwayman than an Earl.
But I assure you
he is. in fact. who he says he is.
Poses no threat
to our country. shh. or our cause.
Then I am satisfied.
Apologies for the intrusion. My Lord.
Good day to you.
Little fiend is teething.
and the lack of sleep
won't improve his temper.
Yours?
- [door closes]
- Surely. you jest.
[snickers]
Allow me to introduce
Trevor Wattiswade Grey.
your cousin Benjamin's son.
[gagging. vomiting]
- This is where you lived?
- [chuckles dryly]
Ah. it's so overgrown now.
I can hardly believe there was a fire here
if I hadn't seen it myself.
The earth takes everything back
in the end.
- [Jamie] Ah! [chuckles]
- Ian!
[speaking Gaelic]
- [in English] Auntie. Uncle.
- [Jamie] A bhalaich!
[Jamie and Ian chuckle]
- Oh.
- And you remember Frances. of course.
Aye. Welcome to Fraser's Ridge.
- And Rachel? Has the baby...
- The bairn hasna come yet.
Rachel will be most pleased to see ye.
But first. will you
lend me a hand with this?
Aye.
What have you done to the corncrib. lad?
And the stables?
Follow me. Got something to show you.
What in God's name happened to you?
A rumor reached me that a turncoat captain
may have been fighting with the Rebels
when our troops captured this city.
And you thought that captain
was Ezekiel Richardson?
I came to find out.
None of the Rebels would speak to me
until I suggested ale and a game of Brag.
[clears throat]
And did you manage
to learn the whereabouts
of that traitorous bastard?
I'm sorry.
did you say that was my cousin's baby?
Ben's got a baby?
- And a wife.
- I had no idea.
But I'm glad he's here.
I'll be most pleased to see him.
Has his regiment been transferred?
He's. um...
not here.
William. I am...
I'm very sorry to tell you that...
Ben is dead.
[somber music playing]
No. that's impossible.
He was taken prisoner
while out with a raiding party.
and held by Rebels
at Middlebrook Encampment in New Jersey.
There was...
Was an outbreak of gaol fever.
I was...
terribly saddened to hear the news.
Because I knew you would be. too.
I know how much you looked up to him.
Who was the commander
of this raiding party?
How was Ben captured?
Were any of his comrades taken with him?
I've given you all the information I have.
Does Uncle Hal know?
Does Henry?
Not yet.
I've drafted a letter
to my brother half a dozen times.
but I'm afraid. once he finds out
that his eldest
and favorite son is dead. then...
he will die of heartbreak and...
I do not think I could bear that.
And the child?
Not long after I had
received news of Benjamin's death.
a young lady appeared
on my doorstep with her baby.
claiming she was Benjamin's widow.
Seems the young Lady Grey
had fallen into difficult circumstances.
owing to her husband's absence.
and so. I invited her to stay.
Wait.
You'd never heard of this wife until after
you received word of Ben's death?
No. I don't believe it.
If Ben were married.
he would have told me.
When is the last time
you received a letter from Ben?
I'll admit. I allowed
our correspondence to lapse after...
everything that happened last year.
But he would have told his brother.
And Henry never mentioned anything.
The young lady arrived
with a bundle of love letters.
all sealed with Benjamin's signet ring.
And the boy's name. Wattiswade.
is a family name not commonly known.
I believe her claim.
Any charlatan hoping
to profit off our family's grief
could falsify love letters.
Clearly. you've been hoodwinked
by some... some damn woman.
Some damn woman. am I?
William. may I present
Amaranthus. Viscountess Grey.
[scoffs]
[William Grey] Benjamin's widow.
Ben did speak of a cousin. William.
Though he neglected to mention
said cousin was a drunkard and a fool.
Good day. Uncle John.
[tranquil music playing]
Welcome home.
What have you done. lad? What is this?
- We've built your house for ya.
- Our house?
[Ian] Aye. I took the plans
you made before you left.
called everyone together.
The Beardsleys. the Lindsays.
and some of your other Ardsmuir men.
Tore down the stables.
used that lumber for the start.
Then. when folk got word
of what we're about.
they'd come by with wood
or furnishings they could spare.
- even just to lend a hand.
- [Jamie] A Dhia.
[Claire] Wow.
Ian. it's beautiful.
[Ian] Don't worry. Auntie.
I've staked out a wee garden for ya.
I thought I heard voices.
[Claire] Rachel.
Look at you.
- You're glowing.
- [laughs]
- How are you?
- I'm well.
Now. would you like to see thy house?
[in Gaelic] Young Ian.
Thank you very much.
[in English] You're very welcome. Uncle.
[door opens]
Well. what do you think?
Wow. Ian...
Well. it was not just me.
A lot of hands.
Just like I imagined.
These are from the stables.
- Look at this view.
- Aye. it's a beautiful spot.
Oh. it's fantastic. The kitchen...
I ken you need plenty of light
for your surgeries.
so I made the south-facing windows
nice and big.
And I built the table from memory.
Hope it's the proper height.
Is it to thy liking. Claire?
- [chuckling] I don't know what to say.
- [chuckles softly]
Well. where did you get all these things?
Oh. some I found
when we passed through Wilmington.
The rest is from the new trading post.
Hiram Crombie's. running down
by the meeting house.
Ian. Rachel...
this is... this is so thoughtful.
I'm so overwhelmed.
Well. be lying if I said I wasna a wee bit
selfish in putting this together.
seeing as I have your
first two patients right here.
Well. I promise I will take
very. very good care of them both.
Ah. here are the plans.
Frances.
have a look upstairs.
What do you think of this room. Frances?
It's nice. Mr. Fraser.
So. um...
you wouldn't be disappointed
if I were to tell you
I was thinking it should be yours?
I could build you
an armoire over here for your clothes.
and a wee chair
to sit and read. if you like.
You mean a whole room. of my own?
Aye. if it suits you.
It suits me well.
[owl hooting]
[door closes]
The shape of you
in the moonlight. Sassenach.
You look just as you did
the night we made our Faith.
- You know when she was conceived?
- Aye.
- I don't even know that.
- Aye. well...
I may be wrong. of course. but...
I always thought...
it was the night
you first told me you loved me.
In the Laird's chamber. Lallybroch.
You were standing near the window.
The moon was streaming in just so...
as I came to you.
[gentle music playing]
[Claire] Mmm.
You told me that you wanted me
from the first time you ever saw me.
Had something to do
with my hard head and my round arse.
Well. so. you do recall
the occasion? [chuckles]
[gentle music swells]
[softly] How do you know that was
the night that Faith was conceived?
I wanted ya.
I had to have ya.
And once I was inside ya.
I'd have been content
if that was the last thing I ever felt.
Then we started.
I kent a piece of myself
will be inside you forever.
Because I was giving you a child.
[upbeat music playing]
[Jamie] When Ian told me
Crombie had a trading post.
I didn't expect all this.
[Amy] Mr. and Mrs. Fraser.
Boys.
We just heard word of your return.
Amy. It's so good to see you again.
[Jamie] Mrs. McCallum.
And wee Aidan and Orrie.
Not so wee anymore. eh. lads.
Thank you.
And my name is not
McCallum anymore either.
It's Lindsay now.
Evan.
- Mac Dubh!
- Evan.
Well. congratulations on your new family.
Didna ken you had it in ye.
I'm over the moon. Couldna been happier.
And thank you so much
for all your help with the house.
No need. The both of you could've
done the same thing for any one of us.
Beam by beam. it was like
a little prayer calling ye home.
Either my eyes deceive me
or the Frasers have come back.
I bid you both welcome.
It's quite an establishment
you have here. Mr. Crombie.
Well. the Bible instructs us
to use our gifts
to serve one another
as stewards of the grace of God.
I've discovered that I'm quite gifted
in procuring things that people need.
Well. like this fabric.
Will it do for you. Mrs. Lindsay?
That'll do nicely. Thank you.
May I acquaint you with our enterprise?
So good to see you again.
[indistinct conversation]
[Hiram] We have many fine fabrics.
and these just arrived.
And here. you'll find
the tools of your trade. Mrs. Fraser.
Oh! It'll be so nice not to have to send
to Woolam's Creek for some of these.
You don't happen to have
any Jesuit bark hidden somewhere?
That's another name
for cinchona bark. is it not?
It is.
Mrs. Beardsley was asking
for the very same thing just yesterday.
We shall have to procure some.
Mr. Crombie.
I was actually looking for it
to make a tonic for her.
I dinna believe we have the pleasure
of your acquaintance. sir.
Forgive me.
This is Captain Charles Cunningham.
He is my partner in this endeavor.
Captain. these are the Frasers.
Newly returned.
General and Mrs. Fraser.
I'm so pleased to finally meet you.
It's been rather strange
for my mother and I to live on this land.
- never having met its owners.
- Partners. you say?
When I arrived on Fraser's Ridge.
it seemed a bit of commerce
might do some good.
As fate would have it. Mr. Crombie
had been having similar thoughts.
Aye. But not the means
to put them into action.
I had a small pension
to contribute to his inspiration.
Still. he is modest
in calling us partners.
Mr. Crombie does the work.
I am merely content to sit
at my desk and help out when I can.
Well. thank you both. It seems you've
achieved a great deal in our absence.
[Cunningham] And I thank you.
General. for this place
my mother and I
are so fortunate to call home.
Now. if you'll pardon me.
I was on my way out.
I will accompany you. if I may.
- Will you follow me. Mrs. Fraser?
- Yes. actually. Mr. Crombie...
Captain. I must invite you
to call me Mr. Fraser.
Having resigned my commission
following the Battle of Monmouth.
I have no further association
with the Continental Army.
Well. that's modest of you. sir.
I've usually found that any man who's
held a military post of any pretension
- clings to his title for life.
- [chuckles]
Well. mine was merely
a temporary appointment.
But I do ken there are many fine officers
who deserve to retain their titles
after long and honorable service.
I'm sure it's the case with you. Captain.
Well. yes. you are correct
that I am retired.
Though I prefer to retain
the appellation of Captain.
less as a measure of honor
and more because I've never
much liked the name Charles.
[Jamie chuckles softly]
Although. in all honesty. after 30 years
serving in His Majesty's Army.
I suppose I'm simply
used to it. [chuckles]
You fought for the king. then?
Yes.
But I laid down my sword for good
after the Battle of Bemis Heights.
I understand you. too. were at Saratoga.
Aye.
And we would have been on opposite sides
of the same battlefield.
War is a terrible thing.
I am most happy to be done with it.
How did you come
to settle here on the Ridge?
Like a good many others.
I came to North Carolina
because I had acquaintances here.
Two of my former officers
are from Salisbury.
I visited their families. and then.
I walked until my legs
could carry me no farther.
until I found a place
beautiful enough to bring me some peace.
And here I was.
[Claire] Cunningham is a charming fellow.
And he certainly gained
some influence while we were away.
Aye. it'd be wise to ken him better.
That would be the prudent thing to do.
especially since he's a Redcoat.
He's retired. like me.
Says he's done with the war.
I have no reason
not to take the man at his word.
Though I do wonder
if the war is done with him.
Well. I suppose someone could wonder
the same thing about you.
[Jamie chuckles]
Trust me. Sassenach. I'm done.
Whether the war likes it or not.
[clicks tongue]
[Ransom groaning]
- The hair of the dog that bit you.
- Good God. what is that?
The recipe is proprietary.
but the results cannot be argued with.
Drink up.
I'm due to dine
with General Prévost in an hour.
Perhaps you'd care to accompany me?
His cook is far superior to mine.
And despite an unfortunate lack of humor.
the man is a decent soldier.
Ambitious.
I know what you are doing.
It will not work.
Frankly. I'm surprised you're trying
to entice me back into the army.
considering how opposed you were
to my joining in the first place.
Idleness and wallowing
do not suit you. William.
And. though it was dreadfully unfortunate.
the British Army is not to blame
for what happened to Miss Pocock.
No.
I swore to protect her.
I am to blame.
And that devil of a turncoat. Richardson.
I. too. want Richardson to pay
for his actions. and he will.
But there are ways to go about it
that perhaps entail less drinking oneself
into oblivion. night after night.
Well. if you're truly
finished with the army.
perhaps it is time
you returned to England.
Although it would pain me
to part with you again so soon.
you've attained your majority.
and therefore.
you can manage your estates.
My steward is doing
a more than adequate job.
Your steward is not the ninth
Earl of Ellesmere. William. You are.
By way of cuckoldry and a lie.
Well. be that as it may. your mother
was married to the eighth
Earl of Ellesmere
at the time of your birth.
Therefore. the title is yours by law.
- How does one go about renouncing a title?
- You cannot.
- You mean I shall not.
- No. you can not!
A peerage is the gift
of a grateful monarch.
There are no means
set down in law for renouncing it.
A monarch who ceases to be grateful
can strip a peer of his title.
though the only grounds
for that which come to mind
are engaging in rebellion
against the Crown.
- Treason.
- Betrayal of your king and country
hardly seems like a suitable means
of solving your personal difficulties.
It might be easier to ask
what you want to do.
rather than asking
how not to do what you don't.
It might be easier to know what I want
to do if I knew who I bloody was.
At a certain point.
I suppose it is up to you to decide
who you want to be and to act accordingly.
Whether you choose to call yourself
Ransom. Fraser or Grey.
no man with any claim to your parentage
would tolerate the way
you treated Lady Grey yesterday.
That is something I insist you remedy.
I canna say bees are the most
traditional homecoming gift.
but it's very thoughtful of you. Lizzie.
Well. I've always wanted my own hive.
So. thank you.
We'll build a proper home for them.
- Some safe distance from the house.
- I'm so glad to have you both back.
As soon as there's a fresh bit of honey.
we'll bring some over for you.
and Kezzie and Josiah.
So lovely to see you again. Lizzie.
And so good to meet you.
my little namesake. wee Claire.
Go to Mama.
We'll see you both again soon.
Aye.
Bees. very sociable and curious.
Which only makes sense
going back and forth all day.
sharing news with their pollen.
That's one way to put it.
Do you ken that bees are the link
between our world and the spirit world?
That's why I tell them what's happening.
- You do?
- Aye.
You know. if someone should come
to visit. or a new bairn should be born.
or a settler should depart or die.
dinna tell the bees.
they'll take offense
and all of them will just fly away.
- We can't have that. then. can we?
- [chuckles]
[soft mysterious music playing]
[man] Hello. the house!
[music swells]
[gasps]
- [Jemmy] Grandda!
- Jeremiah. you've grown so tall!
Grandda!
That's your granny and grandpa.
Is it really you?
God. I've missed you.
Oh. darling.
[Brianna laughing]
This is Mandy.
Mandy.
Look at you.
I cannae believe it.
We never thought we'd see you again.
- What are you doing here?
- We wanted to come home.
[both laughing]
Jemmy.
Roger.
It doesna matter now. lass. You're here.
- [Brianna] We are.
- We all are.
[laughs happily]
[sizzling]
[Jamie] Our house is your house.
Ye ken that well enough.
You can stay here
until we build you one of your own.
[girls chattering]
Fanny is so sweet with Mandy.
How did she come to be living with you?
She's a wee orphan lass.
Your brother took her under
his protection. entrusted her to us.
William? Does that mean
he knows that you're his father?
He does.
- [blows]
- Ah.
Take it he's not too happy about that.
It doesn't appear so.
Give him time.
Mummy. read me a story.
- Uh. what's the magic word?
- Please.
What do you think?
- Why not?
- [Brianna] Go get 'em.
Mmm-hmm.
You brought a book for the bairns?
Read to me. Grandda. please.
[Jamie] Ah. all right.
[groans softly] Let's see.
- Ah.
- It's like a painting.
Aye.
"In the great green room.
there was a telephone. and a red balloon.
and a picture of...
the cow jumping over the moon.
And there were
three little bears sitting on chairs."
Well. a bear's likely to eat a chair
as sit on one.
and all three of them together.
well. they'll make a meal
of anyone close by wanting to count.
[all laughing]
Lovely bit of nonsense.
I feel like I ken it.
Because I told you about it years ago.
We were on a ship to Jamaica.
and I was missing Bree.
Why don't you all go and finish the book
in the other room.
while the adults chat. hmm?
Jem. you can read it to them.
I hope it's all right Fanny saw that book.
She won't know it's modern. will she?
She's certainly never seen
anything like it. but I'm sure it's fine.
This one is for you.
- Oh. Bree... [sighs]
- [Brianna laughs softly]
Oh. it's marvelous.
Let me see. mo nighean donn.
"The Merck Manual. thirteenth edition."
Popular writer.
Either that. or he's made
a devil lot of mistakes.
It's a medical book.
"Controlling the spread of E. histolytica
requires prevention of access
of human feces to the mouth."
Hmm. It's what folk
have learned about healing.
I'm guessing you ken not to eat shite.
- Yes. darling.
- [all chuckle]
I can't begin to imagine
what they've discovered since I left.
- And I think you will like this one. Da.
- [Jamie] Will I?
- Do you like it?
- Thank you.
- "Frodo Baggins." A Welshman?
- [laughs]
No. not... not exactly.
It's one of Jem's favorites.
Mine. too. actually.
I think the tale might speak to you.
Thank you kindly.
Were you a minister. Roger Mac?
In the future?
No.
No. I was so full of doubt
after everything that happened.
But. well. now that we're back...
Whatever you decide. new folk have
settled on the Ridge since you left.
You should go about. introduce yourself.
There's a man by the name of Cunningham
who helped open the new trading post.
I'd be curious to ken
what you might think of him.
Anything you might learn.
Aye.
...on antibiotics for a while.
had a few checkups.
- but other than that...
- Children are remarkable.
Listening to her heart. you'd never
have known anything was wrong.
The kids are finally asleep.
- Good.
- [Jamie] I still canna believe it.
The sight of you. here.
We weren't even sure if the letters
would reach ye
when we left them at the bank.
It was... Well. uh. an inheritance.
I suppose.
We thought you should ken
what had become of us.
We'd never have dreamed you'd have
used them to find your way back to us.
- To coming home. To family.
- [glasses clinking]
[in Gaelic] Health.
[in English] I. uh...
I brought back another book.
I didn't wanna show it
in front of the kids. but...
"The Soul of a Rebel:
The Scottish Roots
of the American Revolution.
By Franklin W. Randall. PhD."
It's the research Daddy
was doing before he died.
It was published after we had both left.
Did you find it useful?
I started to open it.
but I couldn't even get past the jacket.
I knew that if I read it.
it would. you know.
feel like losing him all over again.
The same with your letters. actually.
We. uh...
we spaced them out because. as long as
there were still unopened ones.
you were still alive.
Something must have happened...
for you to come back middle of a war.
Aye.
Something happened.
A lot of things.
I suppose there are...
There's something
we need to tell you. too.
About Fanny and your sister Faith.
[sighs nervously]
Lady Grey. I owe you an apology.
When you first came upon me yesterday.
I had only just learned
of my cousin's passing.
I was in shock.
Still. that is no excuse
for my ungentlemanly behavior.
I beg your forgiveness for it.
Well. I suppose I was
not altogether kind. either.
I tend to have rather a sharp tongue
when piqued.
You had every reason.
We did marry rather in haste.
Benjamin wrote to tell
his father of the union.
but the letter appears
to have gone astray.
So. I suppose a modicum of skepticism
is to be expected.
You have my deepest sympathies
on the loss of your husband. madam.
Thank you.
And you. on the loss of your cousin.
I beg your pardon.
I'm a bit overcome with emotion.
Quite understandable.
given the circumstances.
[Trevor cooing]
[chuckles softly] He likes being outside.
Fresh air calms him.
He looks quite like Benjamin.
I hope I don't give you pain by saying so.
No.
No. it's a reminder
of the love that bore him.
I suppose that's some consolation.
I do not have any siblings.
Ben and Henry were like brothers to me.
He said as much about you.
And perhaps. when Trevor is older.
you can tell him of his father.
man to man.
It pains me that
he'll have no memory of him.
No knowledge of who he was in the world.
I promise I shall do all I can for Trevor.
And for you. Lady Grey.
- [bird calling]
- [gunshot]
[bird chirps. then silence]
[Jamie] This Robert Cameron
read our letters. you said.
[Brianna] Yes.
[Jamie] Then he not only kens
about the Jacobite gold.
but he knows where we live. When we live.
What's to stop him coming after you?
Nothing.
If he can time travel.
But if he could.
then why hasn't he done it already?
No sane man canna
guess the mind of a mad one.
[sighs] We figured. if no time is
completely safe. rather all be together.
I canna believe
I put wee Jeremiah in danger.
As soon as we're back at the house.
I'll move the gold.
That way. if Cameron does come looking.
he'll have no way to find it.
save through me.
[tense music playing]
[Brianna] My God.
I know there are brands for thieves.
but what is "GR"?
George Rex.
King George.
These men were hanged for being Loyalists?
There are devils
on both sides of this war.
[tense music continues]
Where is your father. child?
- I don't know. This is Esmerelda.
- Eh...
- I wish to speak to your father.
- Look.
[singing in French]
[in English] Stop that.
- Look at me.
- Why?
You are a very impertinent child.
and your father should beat you.
You look like the Wicked Witch.
Fly away on your broom.
What in the name of perdition
do you mean by that?
You wicked child!
Fly away on your broom. you mean old lady.
Ow! That really hurt.
Leave my house.
The girl spoke to me rudely. sir.
and I will not have it.
Evidently. no one has sought
to discipline her correctly.
- So. no wonder.
- Speaking of rudeness.
I don't believe I've had
the honor of your acquaintance.
I'm Claire Fraser.
My son mentioned
you were looking for this.
You are all undoubtedly going to hell.
Who the devil is that?
- The Wicked Witch of the West. I hate her.
- Aye.
Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ.
[sighs] She's brought me Jesuit bark.
In that case. I think. perhaps
that witch was Mrs. Cunningham.
[Frank] Is it my face
you see looming in the darkness?
[kisses]
Why did you not tell me
that Frank Randall looked like Black Jack?
[sighs]
I haven't thought about that
in a very long time.
[sighs] I remember being startled
by the resemblance. but...
I mean. once I was
acquainted with Black Jack.
it quickly wore off...
because they were so different.
You should have told me.
I suppose I should have. but...
well. at first. how could I
have explained that to you?
And then after. well. I...
I didn't know how.
[sighs] I thought
you might have been upset.
that I had married someone who
looked so much like Black Jack Randall.
I might have been upset. but...
there'd have been no point.
You are mine. [chuckles]
[kisses]
Was he an honest man?
Frank?
For the most part.
He kept secrets. But then again. so did I.
Can I trust him. do ye think?
- About what he's written.
- He was an historian.
He wouldn't write something
that he knew to be false.
Why?
Because he mentions my name...
fourteen times so far.
You're in the book?
Aye.
What does it say?
That war is coming to the backcountry.
He says there'll be a battle
in about a year's time
at a place called Kings Mountain.
and that James Fraser dies in it.
[suspenseful music playing]